\pagebreak
\section{SIMD Constructs}
\label{sec:SIMD}

The following examples illustrate the use of SIMD constructs for vectorization.

Compilers may not vectorize loops when they are complex or possibly have 
dependencies, even though the programmer is certain the loop will execute 
correctly as a vectorized loop.  The \code{simd} construct assures the compiler 
that the loop can be vectorized.

\cexample{SIMD}{1c}

\fexample{SIMD}{1f}
 

When a function can be inlined within a loop the compiler has an opportunity to 
vectorize the loop. By guaranteeing SIMD behavior of a function's operations, 
characterizing the arguments of the function and privatizing temporary 
variables of the loop, the compiler can often create faster, vector code for 
the loop. In the examples below the \code{declare} \code{simd} construct is 
used on the \plc{add1} and \plc{add2} functions to enable creation of their 
corresponding SIMD function versions for execution within the associated SIMD 
loop. The functions characterize two different approaches of accessing data 
within the function: by a single variable and as an element in a data array, 
respectively. The \plc{add3} C function uses dereferencing.

The \code{declare} \code{simd} constructs also illustrate the use of 
\code{uniform} and \code{linear} clauses.  The \code{uniform(fact)} clause 
indicates that the variable \plc{fact} is invariant across the SIMD lanes. In 
the \plc{add2} function \plc{a} and \plc{b} are included in the \code{unform} 
list because the C pointer and the Fortran array references are constant.  The 
\plc{i} index used in the \plc{add2} function is included in a \code{linear} 
clause with a constant-linear-step of 1, to guarantee a unity increment of the 
associated loop. In the \code{declare} \code{simd} construct for the \plc{add3} 
C function the  \code{linear(a,b:1)} clause instructs the compiler to generate 
unit-stride loads across the SIMD lanes; otherwise,  costly \emph{gather} 
instructions would be generated for the unknown sequence of access of the 
pointer dereferences.

In the \code{simd} constructs for the loops the \code{private(tmp)} clause is 
necessary to assure that the each vector operation has its own \plc{tmp} 
variable.

\cexample{SIMD}{2c}

\fexample{SIMD}{2f}


A thread that encounters a SIMD construct executes a vectorized code of the 
iterations. Similar to the concerns of a worksharing loop a loop vectorized 
with a SIMD construct must assure that temporary and reduction variables are 
privatized and declared as reductions with clauses.  The example below 
illustrates the use of \code{private} and \code{reduction} clauses in a SIMD 
construct.

\cexample{SIMD}{3c}

\fexample{SIMD}{3f}


A \code{safelen(N)} clause in a \code{simd} construct assures the compiler that 
there are no loop-carried dependencies for vectors of size \plc{N} or below. If 
the \code{safelen} clause is not specified, then the default safelen value is 
the number of loop iterations.
 
The \code{safelen(16)} clause in the example below guarantees that the vector 
code is safe for vectors up to and including size 16.  In the loop, \plc{m} can 
be 16 or greater, for correct code execution.  If the value of \plc{m} is less 
than 16, the behavior is undefined.

\cexample{SIMD}{4c}

\fexample{SIMD}{4f}


The following SIMD construct instructs the compiler to collapse the \plc{i} and 
\plc{j} loops into a single SIMD loop in which SIMD chunks are executed by 
threads of the team. Within the workshared loop chunks of a thread, the SIMD 
chunks are executed in the lanes of the vector units.

\cexample{SIMD}{5c}

\fexample{SIMD}{5f}


The following examples illustrate the use of the \code{declare} \code{simd} 
construct with the \code{inbranch} and \code{notinbranch} clauses. The 
\code{notinbranch} clause informs the compiler that the function \plc{foo} is 
never called conditionally in the SIMD loop of the function \plc{myaddint}. On 
the other hand, the \code{inbranch} clause for the function goo indicates that 
the function is always called conditionally in the SIMD loop inside 
the function \plc{myaddfloat}.

\cexample{SIMD}{6c}

\fexample{SIMD}{6f}


In the code below, the function \plc{fib()} is called in the main program and 
also recursively called in the function \plc{fib()} within an \code{if} 
condition. The compiler creates a masked vector version and a non-masked vector 
version for the function \plc{fib()} while retaining the original scalar 
version of the \plc{fib()} function.

\cexample{SIMD}{7c}

\fexample{SIMD}{7f}

